	3H18
	PAY RANGE: EP21

	LABORATORY PROGRAM SCIENTIST 		(Biology)
					(Chemistry)
					(Forensic)

GENERAL DEFINITION

	This is scientific laboratory analysis work at the program leader level developing and overseeing scientific programs for either the Water Department's Bureau of Laboratory Services or the Police Department's Forensic Laboratory.  This class is differentiated from lower-level technical classes by the development of program design, identification of program goals within defined parameters, evaluation of program results in response to new regulatory and legislative requirements and development of quality assurance procedures.  Work includes networking with professionals and scientists in private industry, government agencies and universities to remain current in the relevant techniques and methodologies.  Employee will function as a technical expert and provide guidance to a team of technical personnel within the context of assigned projects.  Work is performed under the general direction of a laboratory supervisor.

ALLOCATING FACTORS:	(The following conditions must be met for a position to be approved for this class.)

1.	These positions must perform advanced level programmatic and quality assurance work.
2.	The positions must be located in the Water Department's Bureau of Laboratory Services or the Police Department's Forensic Laboratories.


TYPICAL EXAMPLES OF WORK (ILLUSTRATIVE ONLY)

	Conducts initial analyses of new regulatory and legislative requirements or proposed service enhancements; determines and makes recommendations regarding the scope and direction of a program; develops and sets initial program goals, objectives and work plans; identifies timetables, staffing levels, equipment requirements, and budget needs; conducts initial research work; designs and performs initial experiments; researches current literature, regulations and legislation related to a program field; gathers and analyzes data; selects statistical methods to evaluate test results; develops, tests, and documents methodology; consults with program personnel on interpretation of test results; determines the need for related discipline analyses and plans; coordinates and reviews such analyses.
	Provides technical direction to a professional staff on an assigned project; evaluates research results; prepares written reports to summarize data, document findings and recommend treatment; makes oral presentations; prepares reports for publication.
	Prepares quality assurance project plans and standard operating procedures for laboratory programs; keeps current with changes in regulatory and legislative certification requirements; evaluates laboratory compliance with quality assurance procedures; may participate in the evaluation of contractor laboratories.
	Makes recommendations to management regarding the need for ongoing programs; develops on-going monitoring strategies; oversees implementation of program procedures and protocols; provides technical guidance in the development of computerized databases for the storage of analytical data, communication and response procedures, statistical and computer applications, quality assurance procedures, and sampling and analytical methodologies; provides on-the-job training; reviews results and recommends changes in procedures and protocols.
	Trains personnel in the theory and operation of instrumentation for the appropriate specialty.
	May alter computer-assisted instrumentation to enhance interpretation of results; researches appropriate available computer software to improve instrument interpretive capability.
	Determines adequacy of department's resources to accomplish program goals; may serve as project officer for consultants; may technically review work on a contract and make recommendations to a technical superior.
	Serves as resource to the Department in area of expertise; interacts with members of the legal system; interacts with the public for general education purposes or to address issues of concern; arranges evaluation of public responses to areas of departmental responsibility.
	Present expert testimony in court that is understandable to non-professional court participants.
	Performs the above work in the area of specialization.
	Performs related work as required.

REQUIRED KNOWLEDGES, SKILLS AND ABILITIES

KNOWLEDGE OF:

ALL SPECIALTIES 
•	the principles, methods and practices of analytical chemistry as it relates to the area of specialization, including the use and care of state of the art instrumentation.
•	the application of chemical principles, methods and practices in the analyses of samples, as it applies to the area of specialization.
•	the principles and practices of biology, chemistry and physics as they apply to the area of specialization.
•	mathematics and statistics as they relate to chemistry.
•	the principles and practices of quality assurance as they relate to the laboratory setting.
•	the critical elements involved in the preparation of a scientific program and its successful 	implementation.
•	safety practices and procedures as they apply to the laboratory setting.
•	research practices and techniques as applied to the area of specialization.
•	the application of data processing systems as they relate to chemical analyses, data analyses and report generation.

BIOLOGY AND CHEMISTRY SPECIALTIES

•	water pollution control, sludge processing, and water treatment plant operations, processes, design, facilities and equipment as they relate to the area of specialization.
•	drinking water quality criteria.
•	current federal, state and local regulations and standards applicable to specialty in water and waste water treatment and control.

FORENSIC SPECIALTY

•	techniques of forensic analyses, including evidence collection, sampling and preservation.
•	troubleshooting, maintenance and knowledge of internal systems of forensic laboratory instrumentation.
•	current federal, state and municipal legislative procedures and court decisions regarding forensic sciences including mandatory minimum guidelines, scheduling of drugs and pertinent legislation changes.
•	guidelines, procedures and regulations from the National Research Council, Technical Working Group(s), DNA Advisory Board and FBI and the implementation of the recommendation(s) within the laboratory environment.

SKILL IN:

ALL SPECIALTIES

•	the use, care and maintenance of laboratory equipment and sophisticated instrumentation as required by work assignment.

ABILITY TO:

ALL SPECIALTIES

•	direct scientific and technical personnel towards the successful achievement of goals and objectives.
•	train various professionals and technicians in scientific procedures and techniques.
•	simplify, improve, adapt and standardize analytical procedures necessary to resolve problems.
•	prepare and interpret reports detailing the results of tests and analyses.
•	coordinate program activity with scientific and technical personnel in order to achieve 	program data quality objectives.
•	express ideas effectively, both orally and in writing.
•	establish and maintain effective working relationships with associates, consultants, contractors, government regulatory agencies, the legal community and the general public.

MINIMUM ACCEPTABLE TRAINING AND EXPERIENCE  (The following statement represents the minimum training and experience standards which will be used to admit or reject applicants for tests.  Applications submitted by candidates for this class will be reviewed based on training and experience requirements as approved on 8/99.)

EDUCATION

	Completion of a bachelor's degree program at an accredited college or university with major course work in Biological Sciences or Chemistry.

AND

SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE

BIOLOGY 

	Two years of experience in the class of Aquatic Biologist II.

CHEMISTRY

	Two years of experience in the class of Analytical Chemist II.

FORENSIC

	Two years of experience in the class of Forensic Scientist II.


PHYSICAL AND MEDICAL REQUIREMENTS

	Ability to physically perform the duties and to work in the environmental conditions required of a position in this class.

LICENSES, REGISTRATIONS AND/OR CERTIFICATES

	Possession of a valid proper class motor vehicle operator's license as issued by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania prior to appointment and during tenure of employment in this class, if required by work assignment.

	Class Established 
CSC - 6/87
Ad. Board - 7/87
	Latest Spec. Rev.
	CSC - 6/99																CSC - 6/99
	Ad. Board - 8/99
JW/jw
??



 

 

	3H18
	PAY RANGE: EP21

                  LABORATORY PROGRAM SCIENTIST  (Cont'd)	     (Biology)
			      (Chemistry)
			      (Forensic)

