	5H12
	PAY RANGE: EP26

	WARDEN

GENERAL DEFINITION

	This is administrative correctional work planning, directing, and coordinating the activities at a municipal correctional institution.  Conferring with inmates and their representatives and supervising a large staff of correctional personnel are significant aspects of the work.  Work is performed under the direction of an administrative superior.  Work involves conditions which can only be controlled partially.

TYPICAL EXAMPLES OF WORK (ILLUSTRATIVE ONLY)

	Directs the overall activities of a municipal correctional institution; meets with subordinate supervisors to discuss current practices and procedures; evaluates activities reports and implements procedural and operational changes where needed.
	Tours the institution to ascertain employee and inmate observance of policies and practices; points out to the appropriate supervisory personnel conditions which deviate from standards; approves temporary exceptions to institutional operations during emergency situations.
	Confers with supervisors to discuss discipline problems, policy interpretation and other such matters relating to the operations of the institution; makes recommendations for the revision of policies, rules and regulations; reviews and submits to a superior activities reports and budgetary requests.
	Oversees delivery of contract services that include food, medical, mental health and maintenance services.
	Administers and reports on Court Orders, Court Mandates and Consent Decrees in the manner required by the court.
	Discusses inmate problems with attorneys, judges, and members of interested agencies; conducts tours of the institution for official groups.
	Coordinates an extensive computer training schedule.
	Speaks to civic, educational, religious and other concerned groups.
	Performs related work as required.

REQUIRED KNOWLEDGES, SKILLS AND ABILITIES

KNOWLEDGE OF:

•	the theory, principles, and practices of modern penology.
•	the rules and regulations governing the security of a correctional institution.
•	the behavior patterns, discipline, and attitudes of individuals or groups of persons in custody.
•	the social factors which result in the institutionalization of juveniles or adults.
•	modern correctional institution management principles, methods, and techniques.
•	supervisory methods and techniques.
•	the rules, regulations, and statutory laws governing operations of correctional institutions.
•	the applicable Court Orders, Court Mandates and Consent Decrees as they apply to                    persons in custody
•	the social work principles and methods employed in inmate rehabilitation.
•	the care and use of firearms.

ABILITY TO:

•	analyze organizational and program policies and to make appropriate recommendations concerning the revision or addition of new practices and procedures.
•	oversee contracted services; including food, medical, mental health and 		maintenance services
•	coordinate an extensive and ongoing computer training schedule for the 		correctional and administrative staff
•	express ideas effectively, both orally and in writing.
•	establish and maintain effective working relationships with associates and inmates.

MINIMUM ACCEPTABLE TRAINING AND EXPERIENCE  (The following statement represents the minimum training and experience standards which will be used to admit or reject applicants for tests.  Applications submitted by candidates for this class will be reviewed based on training and experience requirements as approved on 8/99.)


EDUCATION

	Completion of a bachelor's degree program at an accredited college or university.
AND

GENERAL EXPERIENCE

	Eight years of correctional and/or rehabilitative experience in a correctional institution including six years supervising a staff engaged in such services.

AND

SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE

	Two years directing, through subordinate supervisors, a social service or rehabilitative program in a correctional institution.
OR

	Two years as a Deputy Warden.

	Or any equivalent combination of education and experience determined to be acceptable by the Personnel Department.

PHYSICAL AND MEDICAL REQUIREMENTS

	Ability to physically perform the duties and to work in the environmental conditions required of a position in this class.

	Class Established 
 1/54
Latest Spec. Revision 
CSC - 6/99
Ad. Board - 8/99

JW/jw
??



 

 

	5H12
	PAY RANGE: EP25
	WARDEN (Cont'd)

