	7Q01
	PAY RANGE: 44

	PRISON TRADES WORKER I

						(Brick Mason)			(Plasterer)
						(Carpenter)			(Roofer)
						(Locksmith)			(Sheet Metal Worker)
						(Machinist)			(Stationary Engineer)
						(Painter)			(Upholsterer)
						(Printer)

GENERAL DEFINITION

	This is full performance level trades work in the area of specialization.  Employees in this class work in a specific trade requiring skill in the use of tools and equipment to perform various maintenance and repair tasks.  Work differs from that of corresponding trades classes in that prison trades workers are responsible for the custody of a small group of inmates and for instructing them in the elements of the trade.  They are also responsible for the performance of guard duties as required.  Work involves some exposure to disagreeable conditions and moderate physical effort.  Employees report to a higher level maintenance superior.  

ALLOCATING FACTORS:	(The following conditions must be met for a position to be approved for this class.)

•	Position must be responsible for performing various maintenance and repair work in a specific trade.
•	Position must have custody of a group of inmates to school them in various aspects of the designated trade.

TYPICAL EXAMPLES OF WORK (ILLUSTRATIVE ONLY)

ALL SPECIALTIES

	Explains and demonstrates trade skills and practices to a small group of inmates; assigns repair and maintenance tasks; inspects work on the job, giving advice when necessary.
	Keeps order and discipline during work; searches inmates for contraband; watches for and reports unusual conditions or disturbances; takes required action in emergencies to prevent escapes and suppress disorders; performs standard guard duties when necessary.
	Makes estimates of time and materials.
	Performs related work as required.

BRICK MASON SPECIALTY

	Lays brick, terra cotta, cinder and other block to construct walls, partitions, archways, chimneys and other structures; spreads mortar with a trowel over brick; imbeds brick firmly into the mortar and taps it in with trowel into the desired position; finishes mortar between bricks with trowel; cuts brick with hammer to fit spaces too small for whole bricks; checks the horizontal and vertical alignment or rows with gauge lines and mason's level; erects and works from scaffolding.

CARPENTER SPECIALTY

	Erects building frames, installs interior and exterior trim, lays flooring and joists, and refinished wooden furniture; cuts, shapes, and fastens wood and allied materials using power saws, joiners, lathes, planes, and other hand and power tools common to the trade; cleans, sharpens, and repairs hand and bench tools; erects and works from scaffolding and ladders.

LOCKSMITH SPECIALTY

	Inspects malfunctioning or defective locking devices to determine cause of improper functioning; uses small hand tools to remove locking device from door, closet or locker; disassembles locking device and repairs or removes malfunctioning component; reassembles locking device and reinstalls in proper place; maintains and repairs hydraulic and mechanical door checks or stops by removing, disassembling and repairing, or replacing defective components using small hand tools; reassembles, replaces and tests for proper operation; selects key blanks and duplicates keys by cutting key blank on key machine to fit locks; makes master keys; unlocks doors when keys are lost or broken in the lock or when combinations are unknown, by manipulating lock with small tools or by removing it; changes combinations or cylinders of locking devices and occasionally opens safes when necessary.

MACHINIST SPECIALTY

	Shapes metal objects, using lathes, shapers, milling machines, drill presses, and similar metalworking power equipment; uses taps, dies, reamers, files and other hand tools to finish objects; uses micrometers and other precision-type measuring instruments to gauge work and determine accuracy; dismantles equipment such as motors, pumps, engines, compressors, and laundry equipment; locates source of poor or inadequate performance, and makes necessary repairs; assembles and tests equipment; makes repairs to a wide variety of appliances, tools, furnishings and other metal objects; maintains metal working hand tools and power machinery; fashions shafts, bearings, gears, fiber insulators, valve stems, machine parts, strap brackets, jigs, and a wide variety of other items of machinery and equipment; refaces valves and flywheels; rebabbits bearings, cuts keyways.  

PAINTER SPECIALTY

	Prepares surfaces; removes old paint by use of burners, sandpaper, electric sanders, liquid paint removers, scraper and sandblaster; applies putty, caulking, spackle and plaster to small holes and cracks; applies tape to seams of dry wall; mixes and matches paints and stains using the proper proportions of pigment, base and thinner or by adding tints to a base; applies paint to the interior and exterior of buildings, fixtures and equipment using brushes, rollers, and spray guns; paints to an edge; stains furniture and panels; uses ladders, scaffolding and other positioning devices; sets up such equipment; cleans brushes, rollers and spray guns and makes minor repairs to equipment; removes broken glass from window frames, doors and other areas; cuts and shapes new glass; installs and secures glass using putty, hinges, pins and other materials; may paint free-hand and stenciled signs.

PLASTERER SPECIALTY

	Replaces defective laths; chips out broken plaster, concrete, or tile; mixes plaster; applies rough and finish coats to walls and ceilings; spreads plaster over lath with trowel; smoothes plaster surfaces to desired finish; erects and works from scaffolding.

PRINTING SPECIALTY

Prints single and multi-color items on a single or multi-color press involving half-tone, solid line copy and close registration work; operates camera equipment; mixes two or more colors for a color solution; makes necessary adjustments to press and runs job; monitors press while in operation; cleans printing plates and press between color change, using type cleaner or solvent; removes material item after completion.  Operates platen and cylinder letter presses; assists in the review and/or preparation of production specifications; performs bindery and shipping work; performs minor repairs on printing equipment.  Performs related work as required.

ROOFER SPECIALTY

	Locates and removes damaged areas of roofs; repairs by applying a variety of surfacing materials such as slate, tin, tile, slag, asphalt, wood, and felt shingles, corrugated metal, or canvas, using small hand tools such as hammers, rippers, pincers, caulking guns, roofing knives and soldering irons; applies flashing and metal stripping for weather proofing; fabricates, repairs and installs rain spouts and gutters, save boxes, skylights, smoke pipes, and other sheet metal appurtenances normally considered part of the roof for repair purposes using tools such as pliers, sheers, rollers, and brakes; may fabricate tin feed boxes and other small metal objects; may assign routine manual labor tasks such as rolling paper or heating tar to a small group of trades helpers; reviews work of helpers for conformance to instructions; performs tasks as assigned during periods of inclement weather.  

SHEET METAL WORKER SPECIALTY

	Lays outs, cuts, bends and shapes metal sheeting for such items as radiator covers, boxes, trash cans, duct work and partitions using shears, angle cutters, rollers, brakes, and other forming machines; punches and drills holes for bolts, screws, and rivets; joins metal parts together using solder, rivets, screws and bolts.
	Inspects metal furniture, building fixtures, doors, ventilating ducts, steam tables and radiator covers; removes worn-out or damaged parts using hack saws and burners; cuts, bends and shapes replacement parts; attaches replacement parts using solder, rivets, screws and bolts.
	Installs, repairs and maintains metal roofing appurtenances such as flashing, eaves, boxes, rain spouts, gutters and smoke pipes.

STATIONARY ENGINEER SPECIALTY

	Maintains and repairs various types of mechanical equipment which are appurtenances of the high pressure system such as oil feed pumps, boiler feed pumps, vacuum pumps, circulating pumps, air compressors, hot water generators, circulating and ventilating fans, water softeners and similar mechanical, steam, or electrically operated equipment; turbines scale from tubes with pneumatic tools; replaces worn-out or damaged boiler tubes.  
	Assigns stationary fireman and inmates in boiler room operation and maintenance duties; checks work upon completion; checks gauges to see that steam is maintained; adjusts levers and valves controlling the proper mixture of air and fuel to the combustion chamber; manipulates valves to admit water to boilers; takes temperature and pressure readings and records such readings in log book; performs minor repairs on refrigeration and other mechanical equipment; may replace expansion valves; may install new dryers; may repair leaks; packs valves and steam fittings.

UPHOLSTERER SPECIALTY

	Strips furniture down to frame using ripping chisel and shears; repairs defective parts; attaches spring section to frame; cuts and sews new covering; replaces padding and covering over spring section and tacks to frame; screws leg units to frame; touches up furniture with paint as required; cuts, sews, and finishes canvas products and related materials; estimates time and materials for individual work order; maintains production and cost records of furniture received, refurbished and shipped; prepares periodic reports of production, material used and cost figures indicative of actual cost and finished product value.  

REQUIRED KNOWLEDGES, SKILLS AND ABILITIES

KNOWLEDGE OF:

•	the methods, materials, tools and practices used in the designated trade specialty.
•	the occupational hazards and safety precautions of the trade.

SKILL IN:

•	the care and use of tools, materials, and equipment used in the trade.

ABILITY TO:

•	work from ladders and scaffolding.
•	instruct a small group of inmates in the basic practices of the trade.
•	make estimates of time and materials.
•	understand and follow oral and written instructions

MINIMUM ACCEPTABLE TRAINING AND EXPERIENCE  (The following statement represents the minimum training and experience standards which will be used to admit or reject applicants for tests.  Applications submitted by candidates for this class will be reviewed based on training and experience requirements as approved on 9/92.)

EDUCATION

	Equivalent to completion of the eighth grade.
AND

GENERAL EXPERIENCE

CARPENTER; MACHINIST

	Four years of experience learning the trade as a helper or apprentice.

BRICK MASON; LOCKSMITH; PAINTER; PLASTERER; ROOFER; SHEET METAL WORKER; STATIONARY ENGINEER; UPHOLSTERER

	Three years of experience learning the trade as a helper or apprentice.
	Or any equivalent combination of education and experience determined to be acceptable by the Personnel Department.

	NOTE:	Training in a post high school approved trade school curriculum in the designated specialty area for a minimum of six months up to a maximum of one year can be equated on a month by month basis for the general experience requirement.

PHYSICAL AND MEDICAL REQUIREMENTS

	Ability to physically perform the duties and to work in the environmental conditions required of a position in this class.

LICENSES, REGISTRATIONS AND/OR CERTIFICATES

ALL SPECIALTIES

	Possession of a valid proper class motor vehicle operator's license as issued by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania prior to appointment and during tenure of employment in the trade if required by work assignment.

STATIONARY ENGINEER

	Possession of a grade "A" Stationary Engineer's license as issued by the Philadelphia Department of Licenses and Inspections prior to appointment and during tenure of employment as a Prisons Trades Worker I (Stationary Engineer).

	Class Established  
CSC - 10/82
Ad Board - 11/82

Latest Spec. Revision
	CSC - 4/99
	Ad Board - 8/99
LY
??



 

 

	7Q01
	PAY RANGE: 44

	PRISON TRADES WORKER I (Continued)

					(Brick Mason)			(Plasterer)
					(Carpenter)			(Roofer)
					(Locksmith)			(Sheet Metal Worker)
					(Machinist)			(Stationary Engineer)
					(Painter)				(Upholsterer)
					(Printer)			

